Covid—19 remains highly contagious
and even people without
symptoms are spreading it.
So we need to keep washing our
hands...
SHE SINGS
..wearing our face coverings...
..and making space for each other.
And now we’re indoors more...
Fixed it, Mum!
..we should let fresh air in to help
blow Covid—19 particles away.
Let’s keep doing all
we can to help stop the spread.
Remember — hands, face, space,
and let fresh air in.
Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel, Robert Buckland,
the Government’s
the Government’sjustice Secretary.
the Government’s justice Secretary.
Before
the Government’sjustice Secretary.
Before that, prison officer. Labour
Before that, prison officer. labour
Shadow
Before that, prison officer. Labour
Shadow Schools Minister and one—time
Shadow Schools Minister and one-time
president of
Shadow Schools Minister and one—time
president of the National Union of
Students, Wes Streeting. Joining us
Students, Wes Streeting. joining us
down
Students, Wes Streeting. Joining us
down the line, former Prime Minister
of Australia between 2015—18 and
of Australia between 2015-18 and
twice
of Australia between 2015—18 and
twice leader of the Liberal party in
Australia, Malcolm Turnbull. And
Anand Menon, professor of politics
Anand Menon, professor of politic
at King’s
Anand Menon, professor of politics
at King’s College London and talk
radio host and journalist
radio host and journalistJulia
radio host and journalist Julia
Hartley—Brewer.
radio host and journalistJulia
Hartley—Brewer. APPLAUSE
Good evening, welcome to my guests
in the studio and to Michael temple
joining us down the line. Bright and
earty in the
early in the morning in Australia.
earty in the morning in Australia.
Thank you very
early in the morning in Australia.
Thank you very much. Our live
audience is with us again via video
link. This time you are from
Chelmsford, very good to see you
there. Thank you for
there. Thank you forjoining in the
there. Thank you for joining in the
programme and
there. Thank you forjoining in the
programme and watching us. You can
programme and watching us. You ran
join in the
programme and watching us. You can
join in the conversation in the
usual way, as you know how, on
social media. Let’s hear what you
have to say about tonight’s
discussion. Our
discussion. Ourfirst question
discussion. Our first question
tonight is
discussion. Ourfirst question
tonight is from Steve Lester. Good
evening everyone, good evening
panel. I would like to ask, it is
the final orders at the last chance
saloon regarding Brexit. The
countrrs
country’s economy is on its knees
countrrs economy is on its knees
and regardless
country’s economy is on its knees
and regardless of whether you are
being a remainder or a Leaver, we
are all suffering from a lack of
closure due to the stubborn egos on
all sides. Where and how is it going
all sides. where and how is it going
to all
all sides. Where and how is it going
to all end? Well, that is the
$64,000 question, Robert? I
$64,000 question, Robert? Iwant
to all end? Well, that is the
$64,000 question, Robert? I want it
$64,000 question, Robert? Iwant it
to end in a
$64,000 question, Robert? I want it
to end in a deal. I think we are now
very much at the end game. It looks
like the end of the weekend when
both things will be decided one way
or the other. We have been very
dear
clear that we are not asking for the
earth, we are not even asking for a
bespoke deal. We want something akin
to the relationship the EU enjoys
with Canada, very straightforward,
free trade agreement which allows
two sovereign state, in Britain, and
a sovereign bloke to work together.
-- sovereign
—— sovereign block. I have a deal
-- sovereign block. I have a deal
ran be done.
—— sovereign block. I have a deal
can be done. The Prime Minister is
ran be done. The Prime Minister is
sounding very
can be done. The Prime Minister is
sounding very pessimistic about it,
isn’t he? He is being very firm and
direct about what we cannot accept.
The idea that somehow there can be a
The idea that somehow there ran be a
continuing legal
The idea that somehow there can be a
continuing legal link of the type
that was in the end rejected, not
just in a referendum but in a
succession of referendums is only
stating the truth. Throughout this
we have been extremely direct about
it. We had said that is not
acceptable, we cannot have a future
acceptable, we rannot have a future
relationship
acceptable, we cannot have a future
relationship that means if we do
something as a sovereign state, then
Europe ran
Europe can impose tariffss or other
Europe ran impose tariffss or other
penalties
Europe can impose tariffss or other
penalties upon us. That doesn’t seem
to me to be consistent with a future
free trade agreement would like the
ones we see across the world. What
ones we see across the world. what
about this
ones we see across the world. What
about this contingency deal, if you
like, that the EU suggested today?
That if we don’t manage to strike a
deal and the Prime Minister is
sounding very pessimistic this
evening, there will be contingency
plan so planes can keep flying and
plan so planes ran keep ﬂying and
freight ran
plan so planes can keep flying and
freight can keep going between the
freight ran keep going between the
countries,
freight can keep going between the
countries, is the Government likely
to accept that deal? We have been
preparing throughout for a change
that would come in any event at the
end of the year, with or without a
deal, there would be changes. Is it
likely to accept what the EU is
offering, the easing of movement
between the EU and the UK while
Ideal tries to get thrashed out? We
will do everything to advance the
interests of the citizens that we
serve. Clearly, it is an everybody’s
serve. Clearty, it is an everybode
interests
serve. Clearly, it is an everybody’s
interests to avoid the logistical
difficulties... Is that a yes or no?
I’m concentrating on the current
negotiation. I think it is right for
us to do that and really push it to
the end. The Prime Minister is
straining every sinew to get this
sorted out. That has been our
position throughout. It’s very
dear, very
clear, very straightforward. I hope
dear, very straightforward. I hope
that my
clear, very straightforward. I hope
that my friends in Europe are
listening and they will act in a way
that means we can reach that
that means we ran reach that
agreement.
that means we can reach that
agreement. Also listening is Malcolm
Turnbull, a former Prime Minister of
Australia. The Prime Minister here
has said tonight get ready for an
Australia style deal if we don’t
manage to sort out a trade deal with
the EU. Should the UK be happy with
that, in your opinion? Well, it will
be pretty disappointing, I think. We
have a deal with the EU on WTO terms
and there are really some very large
barriers to Australian trade with
Europe, which we are seeking to
address as we negotiate a free—trade
address as we negotiate a free-trade
agreement
address as we negotiate a free—trade
agreement with Europe. But
Australians would not regard our
trade relationship with Europe as
being a satisfactory one. I mean,
they are rather third biggest
trading partner I guess because it
is such a big economy but there are
very big barriers to Australian
exports, of agricultural products in
particular. There are a lot of
frictions in the system, in terms of
services. There is a lot to aim for.
when I was
When I was Prime Minister, we
when I was Prime Minister, we
started
When I was Prime Minister, we
started formal negotiations over
European-
European— Australian free trade
European- Australian free trade
agreement
European— Australian free trade
agreement but that will take some
time. Be careful what you wish for.
Australia’s relationship with the EU
is not one, from a trade point of
view, that Britain, I think,
view, that Britain, Ithink, would
want. Frankly. Julia? With all due
want. Frankly. julia? with all due
respect, Mr
want. Frankly. Julia? With all due
respect, Mr Turnbull referred to
Brexit as a catastrophe after he
left office, that’s not what I think
it is. Where we end up with a Deal
it is. where we end up with a Deal
or no Deal?
it is. Where we end up with a Deal
or no Deal? I genuinely think anyone
who thinks they know right now,
including Michel Barnier and Lauder
including Michel Barnier and lauder
Frost, the
including Michel Barnier and Lauder
Frost, the two negotiators, I think
they would be lying, we don’t know.
If this is the last... Waiting for
the other side to blink moment or
the inevitable drama you would get
at the end of any sort of trade deal
going right at the 11th hour, the
last second of the 11th hour, who
knows? I think the crucial thing to
remember here is why people voted
Brexit. I’m pretty sure, as is
always the case when I’m on the
always the rase when I’m on the
show, I
show, lam
always the case when I’m on the
show, I am the only person here who
voted for Brexit. I voted for Brexit
not because, I wonder what the
tariff will be on oranges or milk or
W tars coming
VW cars coming into the country? I
WI tars coming into the country? I
voted for
VW cars coming into the country? I
voted for Brexit because I want the
people in charge of my country to be
peoplc in charge of my country to be
democratically
people in charge of my country to be
democratically accountable to me and
everybody else here. Because I
believe we are proud nation an
independent state and I don’t want
others to have a say over how we run
others to have a say over how we mn
our
others to have a say over how we run
our business. Once we have that
principle, which is why most people
principle, which is why most peopla
voted for
principle, which is why most people
voted for Brexit, then they
difficulties ahead of getting a
Brexit deal, given what the EU are
offering, become very clear and very
difficult to surmount. If the EU is
basically saying they want to play a
game of Simon says, which is the EU
says whatever we do, you have to
follow, here are the rules we have
follow, here are the mles we have
and the
follow, here are the rules we have
and the regulations we have and if
we change them in the future, you
have to change them we will punish
you. Now, there is no nation state
that would put up with that. Whether
that would put up with that. whether
they were a
that would put up with that. Whether
they were a tiny little Caribbean
nation in the middle of the Pacific,
America, China or Britain, France
wouldn’t put up with being told that
by the EU if they were outside the
EU, so it is impossible for the
Prime Minister to give on that. It’s
impossible for the Prime Minister to
agree the European Court of
agree the European Court ofJustice
agree the European Court of justice
should
agree the European Court ofJustice
should have the final say on issues
dispute. It’s impossible for us to
55V
say yes, of course we don’t have any
rights over our own fishing. These
are fundamental principles and if
are fundamental principlas and if
the EU
are fundamental principles and if
the EU is demanding we give up on
those fundamental principles, I’m
those fundamental principlas, I’m
afraid
those fundamental principles, I’m
afraid Adeel will not be done. If
there is a cost to that, so be it.
Not my ideal but if that is the case
Not my ideal but if that is the use
I would
Not my ideal but if that is the case
I would rather stick with the
principlas
principles that we are an
independent nation state and we
should be treated like that and not
as a naughty school child that needs
to be punished. You say that you are
the only person who voted here. I
will remind you we had the
Government here who
Government here who campaigned to
take us out of Brexit and the EU so
you are not entirely alone. I’m
pretty sure. You have your hand up,
Stephen? why
Stephen? Why can the Government not
Stephen? why ran the Government not
explained to
Stephen? Why can the Government not
explained to the people of great
Britain what being out of Europe
actually means? And what is the real
impact of no Deal? Surely, no Deal
might be better than a raw deal
based on what Europe thinks. Do you
want us to talk the implications of
no Deal versus a thin deal, perhaps?
The first thing I will say, I have a
degree of respect for what
degree of respect for whatJulia
degree of respect for whatjulia
said.
degree of respect for whatJulia
said. There is a political
principle. If there is an economic
price to be paid, I will pay it,
that’s fine. What frustrates me
that’s fine. what frustrates me
around
that’s fine. What frustrates me
around the debate around Brexit as
many people who say we can leave
many people who say we ran leave
with no
many people who say we can leave
with no Deal and it won’t have
consequences, that is simply not
tme. It
true. It has enormous consequences.
tme. It has enormous consequences.
Even leaving with
true. It has enormous consequences.
Even leaving with a deal has
consequences because it affects our
trade. Without a deal means
trade. without a deal means
everything
trade. Without a deal means
everything from cheques and tariffs,
which means price rises for
foodstuffs coming from the
continent, it will mean bigger
tailbacks. It will have a very
profound impact on how our economy
works, how easy it is to trade with
the European Union fostered going
back to julia,
back toJulia, if
the European Union fostered going
back to Julie, if you say ultimately
back to julia, if you say ultimately
I want to
back to Julie, if you say ultimately
I want to be sovereign and I
back toJulia, if you say ultimately
I want to be sovereign and I mean
they can’t tell me what to do and I
will pay the price, that is
absolutely fine. But one other thing
is that were striking to me is when
the Chancellor made his statement
recently was that even though the
OBR documents he drew on talked
about a A% impact on the economy of
about a 496 impact on the economy of
Brexit
about a A% impact on the economy of
Brexit with no Deal and 2% more if
Brexit with no Deal and 296 more if
we have
Brexit with no Deal and 2% more if
we have no Deal chose not to mention
Brexit at all. I would have thought
that if you are planning for
something this big, and let’s face
it, it has to be big or it wouldn’t
have been worth the hassle. If you
are planning to something this big,
the Government would say, these are
the impacts, this is what will
happen, this is how we will prepare
and ultimately it will be worth it
but there is no planning or
preparation and that I find
mystifying. Let’s hear a bit more
from our audience. Susan?
from ouraudience. Susan? I
mystifying. Let’s hear a bit more
from our audience. Susan? I get
confused by the deal or no deal.
From the moment we left or decided
to leave, the deal on the table was
the WTO terms in the absence of
anything else. So that is the deal
and I think we never lost our
sovereignty by being in the EU and
we were much stronger at the table,
formulating the single market and
formulating the singla market and
working with
formulating the single market and
working with it, which seems to have
had tremendous advantages the small,
medium and the big corporates in our
country. So
country. Sol
medium and the big corporates in our
country. So Ijust about old enough
remember going into the EU and now
we have come out and I only saw,
growing up, I only ever saw
advantages in my life to being in
the EU. Tony? Thank you. It’s really
nice to hear julia’s
nice to hearJulia’s comments,
nice to hear julia’s comments,
actually. For
nice to hearJulia’s comments,
actually. For me, it’s a question of
sovereignty. I will freely admit I
voted to leave, not because of what
was said on the side of a bus or
promises that were made by British
politicians but absolutely it is a
question of sovereignty. If that is
lost through any deal that is made
in the next few days, I think that
will be a sad move. Vince? I was a
Remainer but I changed my mind when
I saw the level of bullying from
Brussels and that we do seem to be
Bmssels and that we do seem to be
very much
Brussels and that we do seem to be
very much dominated. I would like to
ask everybody, really, whether they
are of the opinion that the EU wants
it to her Britain and they actually
want to demonstrate that other
countries shouldn’t begin to think
about this because it will really,
really hurt? David? Yes, a question
for Malcolm in Australia. It was
interesting to hear that he was
talking down the deal the
Australians have. We have always
been told that we can always fall
been told that we ran always fall
back on
been told that we can always fall
back on an Australian stroke
Canadian deal as though it is some
form of second class. I am surprised
Malcolm says it is a second—class
Malcolm says it is a second-class
deal. I
Malcolm says it is a second—class
deal. I was expecting him to beef it
up. You were Prime Minister, Sir,
are you telling me you couldn’t get
a deal with the EU? I will come to
you in a minute Wes Streeting, but
Malcolm? Sure, the reality is the
European Union has got along history
of protectionism. You would
understand that. The trade deals are
very hard to negotiate. You know,
Britain, the minute Britain pulled
out, the minute the Brexit vote
occurred I said publicly, we will do
a free trade deal with the UK.
Negotiations are still continuing, I
hope they will be satisfactorily
resolved but there are plenty of
points and issues, the protection of
British agriculture from Australian
imports being a very large issue.
But I am hopeful that we will be
able to get a deal done. Look,
believe me, we do not have a trade
deal with the European Union per se.
We trade on World Trade Organization
terms and we are seeking to achieve
a free trade agreement. Look, just
with respect to what
with respect to whatJulia said, it
with respect to whatjulia said, it
is not for
with respect to whatJulia said, it
is not for me to litigate Brexit.
You guys have got to make your own
decisions. The issue, however, is
that there will. ..
that there will... It
decisions. The issue, however, is
that there will. .. It will come
that there will... It will come with
an economic cost, at least in the
short and medium term. I think what
julia said is that
Julia said is that she voted for
julia said is that she voted for
Brexit
Julia said is that she voted for
Brexit and was prepared to pay that
cost. I think what was a pity, a
real pity, is when the referendum
was held, there wasn’t any clear or
objective or authoritative
understanding of what their economic
cost would be. So, in a sense, the
British people were being asked to
give an informed consent. But, you
know, the reality is the die is
fast, so I’m
cast, so I’m afraid to say, however,
fast, so I’m afraid to say, however,
that we are living
cast, so I’m afraid to say, however,
that we are living in a time of
rising protectionism. You know, the
global sentiment tends swing from
free trade to protectionism and it’s
been swinging back in the area of
protectionism for a while. There is
one bit of good news I can give you,
one bit of good news I ran give you,
though, which is
one bit of good news I can give you,
though, which is when Donald Trump
though, which is when Donald Tmmp
pulled out of
though, which is when Donald Trump
pulled out of the transpacific
partnership, I managed to keep that
deal alive without America, which
was quite an unlikely prospect but
we got it done. That trade deal
therefore is alive and in force and
I hope the United Kingdom will
I hope the United Kingdom willjoin
I hope the United Kingdom will join
that and
I hope the United Kingdom willjoin
that and I have no doubt that the
Australian government will support
that. So, you know, if you do end up
joining the TPP, your Aussie mates
will have given you a very good hand
in keeping that deal alive, so that
it ran be
it can bejoined. And indeed I hope
it ran be joined. And indeed I hope
that
it can bejoined. And indeed I hope
that America rejoins it. But Biden
has a different approach to trade
historically than Trump but
protectionism per se has really
risen as a political sentiment in
the United States and around the
world. You know, it’s not... This is
a... You’ve
3... You’ve chosen a very courageous
a... You’ve chosen a very courageous
time to leave
3... You’ve chosen a very courageous
time to leave the largest free
a... You’ve chosen a very courageous
time to leave the largest free trade
zone in the world.
Sounds like listening to Malcolm we
picked the wrong form Australian
Prime Minister to advise the Board
of trade but seriously, we are
potentially days away from or no
deal scenario that I don’t think any
of us want to see. If anyone on the
EU side of the talks, by the way,
thinks that this would be
consequence free for our friends and
partners over the channel on the
European continent or our friends in
the Republic of Ireland, they are
sorely mistaken. There’s a lot
riding on this on both sides of the
negotiations, lots of people’s jobs
and livelihoods, the collective
and livelihoods, the collactive
security of
and livelihoods, the collective
security of our country and our
friends across the European Union. I
want to see the government get a
deal and I desperately hope, by the
way, that
way, thatJuliet is right and some
way, that juliet is right and some
of this is
way, thatJuliet is right and some
of this is choreography. I fear,
listening to what the Prime Minister
has said and what Ursula von der
Leyen from the European Union side
says, that is not where we are and
that should really worry us. I will
give practical examples because
people don’t like forecasts and
predictions but practical example of
what that would mean. The chairman
of Tesco is currently warning us
that prices will go up by 5%. I
that prices will go up by 596. I
think he
that prices will go up by 5%. I
think he understands his business,
the Prime Minister’s spokesman says
he is right, they are telling their
customers, myself included, bills
are going to go up. What about the
unintended consequences? I am Shadow
schools minister. In recent weeks,
the Department for Education has
written to every head teacher in the
country and said you need to look at
your school food supply chains and
make sure you have got long life
product in in case there is any
product in in use there is any
dismption
product in in case there is any
disruption from January the ist. I
dismption from january the 1st. I
consider
disruption from January the 1st. I
consider myself someone who has
followed the twists and turns of
this quite closely. I would never in
a million years have thought no—deal
a million years have thought no-deal
Brexit
a million years have thought no—deal
Brexit would mean problems with
Brexit would mean problams with
school
Brexit would mean problems with
school food. Whether it is the
school food. whether it is the
things we
school food. Whether it is the
things we have been warned about in
terms of manufacturing, just—in—time
terms of manufacturing, just-in-time
sunplv
supply chains
terms of manufacturing, just—in—time
supply chains and disruption to jobs
supply chains and dismption to jobs
and
supply chains and disruption to jobs
and livelihoods and the debate we
have frankly been having for the
last four years, or the unintended
consequences, the unpredictable.
There is so much riding on our
political leaders in the next few
days to try to put the ideological
disagreements to one side and focus
on the practical outcomes for the
British people and for people right
British peopla and for peopla right
across
British people and for people right
across the continent because if no
deal was a bad idea in the good
times, we are now in the midst,
still, of a global pandemic which is
not just having
notjust having a huge impact on
not just having a huge impact on
people’s
notjust having a huge impact on
people’s lives but ravaging people’s
livelihoods so no deal is not a
future we can afford and that is why
future we ran afford and that is why
so much is riding
future we can afford and that is why
so much is riding on the exudates.
Robert, I want to come to you before
we move onto another question in
terms of what Malcolm has said. As I
said at the beginning of the
programme, the Prime Minister has
said in effect get ready for an
Australia style deal, the chances of
a trade deal are not looking
particularly good at the moment.
Malcolm Turnbull, as you heard, is
lukewarm at best about how good an
option that would be. Does that not
give you pause for thought? I
thought what Malcolm said about the
rise of protectionism is very
interesting and he did say that of
course, the tendency within the
European bloc is indeed, sadly,
whilst it has got a single market
whilst it has got a singla market
that
whilst it has got a single market
that works for its members, it tends
to put up barriers against other
states and it is difficult to
negotiate free trade arrangements.
So how
50 how optimistic should we be
So how optimistic should we be
feeling if we have got the Prime
Minister saying, let’s go for an
Australia style deal, it will be
fine and the form Australian prime
ministers say it is not great. What
ministers say it is not great. what
the Prime
ministers say it is not great. What
the Prime Minister is adhering to
the principle of free trade. We know
that history teaches us that free
trade, open markets is actually the
best way to raise living standards
and to lift more people out of
and to lift more peopla out of
poverty.
and to lift more people out of
poverty. That is what works and it
is I think important for this
country at this time to stand up and
stand firm in favour of that open
approach, and all we are saying to
our
ourfriends in Europe is, look, we
our friends in Europe is, look, we
want to
ourfriends in Europe is, look, we
want to work with you. We are in
your neighbourhood, we are your
friends, you know, we have been your
partners for generations. We just
want to change the terms of trade.
It is not so difficult to make that
task. I
task. Iappeal
It is not so difficult to make that
task. I appeal to them, to our
friends in Europe, to put aside
ideology and think of the people who
we all jointly
we alljointly served, and then I
we all jointly served, and then I
think we
we alljointly served, and then I
think we can reach the agreement
think we ran reach the agreement
that
think we can reach the agreement
that would be in our common
interests, as Wes says, there’s a
lot riding on this and there huge
disadvantages for our European
friends if they don’t come to that
sensible deal. You are right to talk
about openness but the Prime
Minister has got to be open now the
public. It is not an Australia deal,
did me
did WTO terms, let’s spell that out,
the government is saying get ready
for Brexit to business but get ready
for what?
forwhat? Is
for Brexit to business but get ready
for what? Is it going to be a deal
or no deal? We are days away from
the 1st of January. Whose fault is
the 1st of january. whose fault is
that? I’m
the 1st of January. Whose fault is
that? I’m not going to say it is
the lst of January. Whose fault is
that? I’m not going to say it is all
of the UK Government side, it takes
two to tango but these issues are
not new, right? This is not new and
the issues that are currently being
laid on the table as the barriers
are entirely predictable. They’ve
are entirely predictable. Therve
been
are entirely predictable. They’ve
been the centre of the debate for
years and the Prime Minister
promised an oven ready deal. It is
dearty not. The
clearly not. The other and ready
dearty not. The other and ready
deal was
clearly not. The other and ready
deal was the withdrawn agreement.
They have already said that. It was
in the manifesto it was the
withdrawn agreement. We are
preparing for all eventualities, it
is wrong to say we are somehow
sitting back and not doing anything
for we have invested £750 billion
into border technology, we have been
preparing for this by making sure
sunplv
supply chains are resilient in all
our public services. This is the
work of a government that has been
going on not
going on notjust for the last few
going on not just for the last few
months
going on notjust for the last few
months but for the last 18 months
since Boris
since BorisJohnson became Prime
since Boris johnson became Prime
Minister.
since BorisJohnson became Prime
Minister. I assure you, I’ve been in
Minister. Iassure you, I’ve been in
the
Minister. I assure you, I’ve been in
the committee rooms. I
the committee rooms. Ijust want to
let Malcolm in because he can’t
let Malcolm in because he can’tjump
let Malcolm in because he can’t jump
in quite as
let Malcolm in because he can’tjump
in quite as easily as you and he’s
had his hand up, Malcolm? Thanks,
Fiona, ran I
Fiona, ran Ijust
had his hand up, Malcolm? Thanks,
Fiona, can Ijust inject an air of
Fiona, ran Ijust inject an air of
perhaps
Fiona, can Ijust inject an air of
perhaps perhaps objective realism
here. There’s an old political
saying in Australia, in the great
race of life, always back
self—interest, because you know it
self-interest, because you know it
is trying. The
self—interest, because you know it
is trying. The reality is, Robert is
right when he makes the point that
trade benefits both sides, and so,
you know, the Europeans have an
interest in having a good trading
relationship with Britain. I mean,
they don’t want to suddenly freeze
Britain out. They don’t buy British
goods because they particularly like
goods because they particularty like
the
goods because they particularly like
the British, or... It is a
financial, commercial
financial, commercialthing.
financial, commercial thing.
However, here
financial, commercialthing.
However, here is the point of
reality. There is always a market
for protectionism politically.
Politicians will always get
applauded when they support or
protect local industries,
particularly those that are
influential. Now, Julia can say, oh,
inﬂuential. Now, julia ran say, oh,
the Europeans
influential. Now, Julia can say, oh,
the Europeans are punishing us by
not giving us a good enough deal. I
mean, that is
mean, that isjust
not giving us a good enough deal. I
mean, that is just not right. They
are acting in their own rational
self interest. The British
government, in its negotiations on
an Australian free—trade agreement,
an Australian free-trade agreement,
and I have
an Australian free—trade agreement,
and I have to say, Simon Birmingham
and Liz Tmss,
and Liz Truss, the respective trade
and Liz Tmss, the respective trade
ministers, are
and Liz Truss, the respective trade
ministers, are doing an outstanding
job and working on that, but we
know, we are big agricultural
exporters, we are very low cost
producers of agricultural products.
We know that Britain is not going to
suddenly say, right, no barriers to
Australian imports you know, of
beef, lamb, etc. They are not going
to do that because they’re farmers,
to do that because therre farmers,
politically,
to do that because they’re farmers,
politically, the farmers could not
compete and politically, that is not
going to be acceptable. 50 the
going to be acceptabla. So the
question is,
going to be acceptable. 50 the
question is, how much additional
access do we get to the European
market? So it is not a question of
punishing or anything like that.
What it
what it is,
punishing or anything like that.
What it is, is people pursue their
what it is, is peopla pursue their
own
What it is, is people pursue their
own interest and when you step out
of a free trade zone, where there
are no barriers, suddenly, people in
France, Germany and elsewhere will
be saying, 0K,
be saying, OK, the Brits have
stepped out, how does it benefit us
to give our firms and businesses and
farmers an edge over the ones in
Britain? You know what? The British
government will be doing exactly the
same thing with other countries. You
know, it is a big, brave world out
there, and you know, I have huge
confidence in Britain. I think you
will do brilliantly but it is
going... But you have to be clearer
about it and recognise there will be
an economic cost and then you have
got to come you know, sales force
and do your best in a very
competitive environment. 0K, we
could obviously talk about this for
a long time but there’s other
questions I want to get into tonight
and before I go ahead to the next
question, I want to mention that
we’re starting a new kind of
audience next year, starting on the
7th of january,
7th ofJanuary, until we can get
7th of january, until we ran get
back on
7th ofJanuary, until we can get
back on the road again and have
peopla in the
people in the studio with us, I
peopla in the studio with us, I
can’t
people in the studio with us, I
can’t wait for that but it might be
some time. We are looking for 50
peopla from
people from across the whole of the
peopla from across the whola of the
UK and
people from across the whole of the
UK and each week we will take the
audience from the pre—selected group
audience from the pre-selected group
of 50. We
audience from the pre—selected group
of 50. We are calling it the QT 50.
of 50. We are calling it the OT 50.
It means you
of 50. We are calling it the QT 50.
It means you might be on quite often
and you need to be free most
Thursday of course. Hopefully you
will have plenty of things to say.
will have planty of things to say.
Get in
will have plenty of things to say.
Get in touch, go to the website and
you ran find out
you can find out more about that and
you ran find out more about that and
we would
you can find out more about that and
we would love to see you and
hopefully I will see some of you on
the programme next year. There we
are. Let’s take our next question.
Martin Beckwith Brown.
The Covid virus does not have legs
walking around looking for victims.
The growth in infections,
hospitalisations and subsequent
deaths is due to many not
following the guidelines correctly.
Shouldn’t people be taking more
personal responsibility
to safeguard others?
ﬂ
Iimagine you
I imagine you are asking this
question because you have experience
of this or because it is something
that particularly irritate you?
that particularty irritate you?
Both,
that particularly irritate you?
Both, actually! It is everywhere you
look. I hear reports on the TV and
elsewhere, oh, it is a minority, but
the trouble is, you don’t have to
the troubla is, you don’t have to
relax too
the trouble is, you don’t have to
relax too much to create the
problem. You know, in Essex, we have
been historically quite low and it
is starting to go through the roof.
And... Peopla,
And... People, you know, I
is starting to go through the roof.
And... People, you know, Iwas in a
And... Peopla, you know, Iwas in a
supermarket this
And... People, you know, Iwas in a
supermarket this morning and there
were... 0K, there were only two or
three people without masks but there
were still three people without
masks and they were young, fit
people. We know that there are
people going in and out of homes, I
even talk to publicans, and they say
even talk to public-ans, and they say
in the area,
even talk to publicans, and they say
in the area, there are pubs that are
not following the rules and they are
not following the mles and they are
upset
not following the rules and they are
upset because they are doing the
right thing and losing trade. 0K,
right thing and losing trade. OK,
let’s take to the panel, Wes, we
have seen the Health Secretary
talking today about infections
rising, particular in areas of the
south—east so should people take
south-east so should peopla take
more
south—east so should people take
more responsibility? Yes, this is a
really big constituency for me, lots
of you will know my constituency, of
the North, is on the London Essex
the North, is on the London Fssex
border
the North, is on the London Essex
border and we’ve got some of the
highest infection rates London, our
part of London and Essex has rates
rising at this week hospitals in my
community have the numbers of deaths
unlike that which they have seen
since the first peak. We can’t be
complacent about this. The fact the
vaccine is being rolled out is of
course a huge relief, not least for
those of us who are desperate for
many of our own family members to
get the vaccine where they are
older, more vulnerable, so we can’t
older, more vulnerabla, so we can’t
wait for
older, more vulnerable, so we can’t
wait for that but we have come so
far, we have made so many
sacrifices, let’s not throw it away
at this late stage. Let’s exercise
in personal responsibility, take
rare, look
care, look out for each other and
rare, look out for each other and
make sure
care, look out for each other and
make sure we get through this
pandemic as well as possible. There
are lots of people in this country
are lots of peopla in this country
who
are lots of people in this country
who have had covert micro who are
still suffering from Long Covid
symptoms and let’s not forget as we
approach Christmas, over 60,000
peopla have
people have died during this
peopla have died during this
pandemic
people have died during this
pandemic and for lots of families,
this is going to be a really hard
Christmas when they are missing
peopla for
people for the first time around
peopla for the first time around
Christmas,
people for the first time around
Christmas, so let’s keep all of that
in mind and do the right thing,
follow the rules, look out for
ourselves and each other, knowing
the vaccine is being rolled out and
we ran
we can look hopefully to a brighter
we ran look hopefully to a brighter
year in 2021.
we can look hopefully to a brighter
year in 2021. Julia? Yes, I think
year in 2021. julia? Yes, Ithink
peopla should
year in 2021. Julia? Yes, I think
people should take more personal
responsibility but I would like that
to be in place of having
restrictions on people’s right to
use their personal
use their personaljudgment and
common sense. The Prime Minister has
constantly talked about good old
British common sense and personal
responsibility. So how would that
work in practice? That would work in
practice in that we would trust that
peopla will
people will do the right thing
because most people have actually
been following the rules. Martin
mentions that a few people aren’t
wearing masks. We don’t know the
reason why those people weren’t
wearing masks and I see people on
wearing masks and I see peopla on
the tube
wearing masks and I see people on
the tube everyday, odd people not
wearing masks but the vast majority
are. The vast majority of publicans
are. The vast majority of public-ans
and
are. The vast majority of publicans
and restaurants and shops, people
and restaurants and shops, peopla
going into
and restaurants and shops, people
going into them, people are going
going into them, peopla are going
about
going into them, people are going
about their daily lives and their
workplaces are doing very sensible
things. They are doing it because
they want to keep themselves, their
colleagues, their
colleagues, theirfamily members
they want to keep themselves, their
colleagues, their family members and
friends, people they pass in the
street, they want to keep them safe.
wire
Wire infections rising then? Because
wire infections rising then? Because
we have
Wire infections rising then? Because
we have a virus which is now endemic
and if you look at the patterns of
this pandemic, in every single
country in the world, where there
you compare Sweden, which did not
have a formal lockdown at all and
did rely on personal responsibility,
or Peru, which locked down for
months and months on end, not even
allowing men and women out of their
homes on the same day, we have seen
exactly the same curve, the areas
where we are seeing the virus rise
in infection rates at the moment are
the areas that were not hit back in
the spring before we locked down. We
are in the winter months. It is
rising in London and London was very
badly hit? In the borough that were
not badly hit before the lockdown,
if you look at the actual granular
data, it is rising only in areas,
favouring, for instance, it is not
rising at very large levels anywhere
else that was hit much earlier in
else that was hit much eartier in
the year. The
else that was hit much earlier in
the year. The reality is that we
have got a vaccine, we should be
making sure we are absolutely
protecting the vulnerable, those who
are over 70, under 70,
are over70, under70, with
are over 70, under 70, with
undertying
are over70, under70, with
underlying health conditions, but in
undertying health conditions, but in
my view we
underlying health conditions, but in
my view we should not be having
restrictions on shops opening or
closing, on pubs or restaurants,
there is no evidence whatsoever that
any of these particular places are
causing a rise in infections. On the
contrary, lots of evidence that when
you have a lockdown, as Wales did,
you have a lockdown, as Walas did,
and are
you have a lockdown, as Wales did,
and are planning to again, or when
you have a lockdown as England did,
for four weeks,
forfour weeks, you end up
for four weeks, you end up
increasing
forfour weeks, you end up
increasing the problem afterwards.
They don’t solve anything or break
any circuits or any fires, all they
do is delay the problem. I think we
should rely on adults in this
country and trust their personal
judgment about keeping themselves
and other people safe and as they
and other peopla safe and as they
have
and other people safe and as they
have been doing anyway, and allow
peopla to go
people to go about their normal
peopla to go about their normal
daily lives as
people to go about their normal
daily lives as much as possible.
Anand. Obviously, people should take
Anand. Obviously, peopla should take
responsibility
Anand. Obviously, people should take
responsibility for themselves and
others and there’s been some really
interesting survey data from you
because that showed the majority of
people who said they would take a
peopla who said they would take a
vaccine
people who said they would take a
vaccine would take it not because
the government told them so but
because they thought it would help
others. I think that is community
spirit that exists in this country.
I disagree withJulia
on the lockdown and it is
interesting that in the last week
of November, the 21st of the 27th,
that the death toll failed...
That was a leg from the infections,
the infection rate went down before
we went into lockdown,
that is official ONS data.
It is not, I don’t think...
The death rate went down,
as it always does, with the time—lag
from the infection rates going down.
The same for the first lockdown,
the infection rate was going down
before we went into lockdown.
Over the two weeks before
the English lockdown was announced,
on the 31st of October,
cases rose by 29%, hospitalisations
rose by 50%, deaths rose by 137%.
The data that was given out,
the data that was used has
since been gone through and even
at the time, that was
being questioned.
The data that was used at that time
was already weeks out of date.
Yes, but the cases
were still rising.
The cases were rising
at a lower rate.
No, they weren’t doing that...
0K, sojust to be clear,
they were rising.
The rate of increase was slowing,
it was actually already levelling
off and going down in some areas
before we went into lockdown.
That is official data.
Anand, I will let
you finish your point.
0K, we could trace the defence
but I think there are other aspects
to this than people doing
what is common sense.
I mean, I don’t understand
what common sense is but I think
there’s a real important role
for government here and I think
there are several things to be said.
One, the government has to be clear
and consistent in its messaging.
Now, what the Welsh case shows me
is not that lockdown doesn’t work.
It is just that if you lockdown then
open the taps, everyone floods out
again and itjust leads to more
rises in infections.
You need to be steady
and gradual about these things.
There is a bit of a tendency
at the moment to say, don’t worry,
at Christmas we can all go out
and that, you know,
as we have from Chris Whitty
and Patrick Vallance yesterday
in Parliament, is possibly
going to lead to an increase
in cases inJanuary.
So we need to think carefully
through what government strategy is.
And the final thing is,
the guidelines need to be clear
and those in power need to be shown
to be respecting them as well.
You know, I don’t want to harp
on about this but the damage done
by the Barnard Castle trip,
because the moment that people
think, "Either that lot aren’t
listening to the rules,
or actually, the rules are a bit
silly", Scotch eggs in pubs,
and actually, once you start
thinking the rules are silly,
then the whole thing starts
to fray at the edges.
Well, what if you allow government
to tell you what you can and can’t
eat and where you can and can’t
eat in a free country,
that gets a bit silly, too.
Well, let’s hear from the audience
because there’s lots of hands up
and I would like to hear from you.
Chﬂs?
Thank you.
It seems to me that...
We have proven already that
common sense doesn’t work
so I think we need to take
a different approach.
And why not to be a lot
more granular about it?
Rather than going countywide or even
countrywide in the case of Wales,
why don’t we focus on the areas
where it is really happening?
So in Basildon, for example,
which is the case that is being
cited in Essex at the moment,
it is not throughout Basildon that
there’s the problem,
it is in certain areas, so why don’t
we just attacked those areas?
Diane?
I actually think that
the government’s policy
on Christmas is ludicrous.
We are all going to get together,
well, I’m personally not,
we’re not, and people,
families are going to get together,
have a drink, cuddle each other
when they should not be cuddling
each other, and doesjulia really
think that we are not
going to have a lockdown
after Christmas?
I am sure we will.
Jimmy?
Thank you.
I think there’s a degree
of conformity fatigue
with a lot of people,
and the problem is that the message
has been so blurred and so varied
over such along period of time,
that now, conspiracy theories
have a lot more gravity
and they have a lot more attachment
than they would ordinarily.
I think people are looking
for an opportunity to not
conform any longer.
People are tired of it.
That’s largely because of the mixed
messages and the flip—flopping that
has been done I think
from the government.
And Malcolm, Australia took
a different path to the UK
in a number of ways,
in terms of dealing with a lockdown.
Where do you stand in terms
ofJulia’s let people
take their own responsibility for it
versus the role of the government?
Well, I think the government
has got a huge role.
We are a Federation,
so national, federal government,
six states and two territories.
Much of the heavy lifting was done
at the state and territory level,
so a number of the...
Excuse me, a number of the states
actually closed their borders.
In fact, at different times,
all the states closed their borders
against other states.
We had a much...
I think we went harder on lockdowns
and in particular, on the borders,
the international borders,
sooner, than many other countries
did including the UK.
And you know, the reality is,
I mean, this is a very complex area
and I don’t want to oversimplify
but it is obvious that this
is a highly infectious disease.
And so, the more...
The way to stop it spreading,
as the gentleman from the audience
said, it does not have arms
and legs, it is spread by people,
you have got to have social
distancing, you have got
to wear masks.
The sooner you can impose
those measures, the less
transmission you will get.
Australia has had
a relatively good experience.
We really...
You know, we sympathise
with the rough time the British
people are going through,
and you know, we wish
you all the best, we wish
there was something we could do
to help from this end and I hope
that vaccines are distributed
as rapidly as possible, but I think
what we have learned globally
from this pandemic is that
early action is best.
You know, the proposition
that people should just
be free to do whatever
they like is pretty naive, frankly.
It sounds good as a political sound
bite but it does not work out very
well in the intensive care unit.
And Malcolm, can I ask you...
Interestingly, the country that has
done the best of all is Taiwan.
Can Ijustjump infora minute?
Sure.
You say acting quickly
was critical for Australia.
Do you think the UK
Government acted too slowly?
Well, it did not act
as quickly as Australia did.
Ultimately, Fiona, every country
in the world, you know,
at similar stages of development,
is dealing with the same issues,
you know, Robert is dealing
with the same justice issues
as his Australian counterparts are,
as his French counterparts
are, and so forth.
What is interesting
about the pandemic, it is like
an old—fashioned examination.
I mean, every country in the world
had to face exactly the same problem
at exactly the same time.
It was like being in
the examination hall,
where the invigilator says," Right,
it is nine o’clock,
you can start writing,
you’ve got three hours".
And so, we can actually test in real
time what approaches worked best.
And I think a key thing, of course,
there are cultural issues,
obviously, the more trust
and confidence people have
in the government, the better,
the more likely they are to take
guidance from the government.
The point Anand made
about leadership and consistency
is a very powerful one.
So, you know, I think the reality
is, social distancing, masks,
all of those old techniques that
have been around for centuries,
probably millennia as well,
have been the most effective.
Robert.
Well, here we are, towards the end
of an extraordinary year,
having been in a position
of responsibility throughout this
crisis, I can tell you that
Malcolm’s characterisation of it
being one giant exam question
is probably a very good one.
I think, like all other
governments in the world,
we have had to learn on the job.
And what mark would you
give the government?
If it is an exam?
I’m not going to start marking
the government because we are not
out of the woods yet.
We are still in a position
where this virus is very
much in our community.
The vaccine has started to arrive.
That’s great but we can’t
take our foot off the pedal.
We have got to keep
dealing with this problem,
wherever we see it.
And what about Diane’s
point about she thinks
it is ridiculous that
people are being allowed to get
together at Christmas?
I think it was right of us
to recognise that Christmas
is a particularty important time
of the year.
I think within that,
a lot of people, a lot of families,
are making decisions and I’m,
certainly from my expense,
talking to lots of families
who are going to exercise restraint.
Here’s that thing:
I think there is clearly a role
for government in setting a plan.
We have the Covid winter plan that
did notjust involve a lockdown,
it involved a return to different
tiers, which I think was very
important, rather than just letting
everything hang out after the end
of the lockdown.
I think that will help
make a difference.
But at the same time, this is not
just about government activity,
it is about each and every one
of us and government...
Yes, trust is a big issue
but government has to show that it
trusts people as well
and that is why I think
it is important that in terms
of the messaging that we give out,
that we don’t sound
ineffectively authoritarian.
In other words, we don’t become too
shrill and we don’t become
too didactic because we could not
achieve the progress that we have
done without the cooperation
and the solidarity of the people
of this country — all of us
have played our part
in dealing with this virus,
and the government trusts people
to do the right thing.
We have a regime in place to deal
with those cases where people
are behaving in a way
that is clearly irresponsible
and we have seen a lot
of fines being issued,
a lot of enforcement action.
It did not work with
Dominic Cummings, though, did it?
Well, look, I take the point
about personal responsibility,
personal examples.
I think that episodes like that,
whether it is people who at some
point have been involved
in politics, no more, but you know,
celebrities and other people,
it is clearly having an impact
on all of us.
So, do you think he did break
the guidelines, then?
Of course he did.
And it was one rule for him
and another for everyone else.
It was an absolute outrage.
It was a deeply unfortunate episode,
there is no doubt about that and it
didn’t help when it came to creating
a consistent message.
But I think one of the contributors
making this point about fatigue
and about people feeling this
is an awfully long road, we have got
to understand that as well.
And that is why the messages
about the end of the tunnel,
the vaccine, what we still need
to do in order to deal with this
problem, because social distancing
will be with us for a considerable
period of time, all these messages
I think actually are well
understood by the majority
of the British people.
I trust them to do the right thing
and I know together...
You don’t trust them,
that’s a lie, I’m sorry,
you don’t trust them to do the right
thing otherwise you wouldn’t decide
who they can and cannot go
to the pub with, who they can
and cannot have in their home,
whether they can be on their patio
or not, their patio,
which tear they are in.
It is absolute nonsense,
for this government to claim
you don’t want to be to dramatic...
Julia, we haven’t got the police
in everybody’s home...
You are policing people’s homes...
We have not.
Right now, we are
policing people’s homes.
You have sacked half of the police
over the last ten years.
Well, we are recruiting
thousands more as we speak.
You think if I had my family,
if I had people from outside my
immediate family from my house
in my home tomorrow night
that I would still have
myjob the next day?
I doubt it.
Julia, if we took your approach,
then the NHS would be overwhelmed.
No, it wouldn’t.
One of the biggest factors
in the decision—making...
So you are saying you don’t
trust the British people.
Forgive me, I was involved...
When you say you do trust
the British people, but if we do not
have the rules telling people
who we can and can’t see
and where we can go...
Let him answer.
I was involved in the
decision—making and I saw
the figures rising...
You just contradicted yourself.
Problems with the NHS,
capacity in our hospitals.
I certainly was not going
to preside as a minister over
a disaster in our NHS.
That was absolutely
out of the question,
we would have
failed the British people.
Throughout this, we have
protected our health service.
The NHS has been long protected.
And make sure that it has been able
to work throughout this crisis.
OK, let’s take another
question from Janine Sawyer.
Good evening.
Footballers at Millwall
and Colchester were booed
for taking the knee in support
of Black Lives Matter on Saturday.
A government minister,
when interviewed on Sunday,
did not unequivocally
condemn the fans.
Should more have been said by both
the politicians and the clubs
in support of the players?
Let’s be clear, you are referring
to George Eustice, are you, Janine,
in terms of government ministers?
Let’s just be clear exactly
what George Eustice did say, Robert.
I wonder if you want to clarify
what the position is.
I’m sorry, I did not catch fully
what George said about that.
George Eustice talked
about Black Lives Matter,
with capital letters,
he certainly talked about that,
Janine, I think that is
what you are referring to.
Anand?
I think it was wrong
to boo the players.
Let me start on the other
side of the argument...
Do you think they were
right to take the knee?
Yeah, I think players can do...
If that is how they want to show
their support for trying to get rid
of racism in sport...
Look, I get irritated
when I’m watching football
and the Black Lives Matter logo
comes across the top.
I don’t like being force fed
what I should think,
even if I agree with it.
I don’t like being told
I have to wear a poppy.
I don’t like people telling me
what I should think, 0K?
It irritates me.
I also think that there’s a lot
of virtue signalling,
particularly by corporates,
you actually don’t do very much
for sort of inequality or prejudice
or that in their day—to—day
practices but stick a logo
on their site to make
themselves feel better.
There are all sorts of problems
with this, but it was wrong to boo
for several reasons.
One, because it isjust rude.
I think the players
who kneel are kneeling
because they want to make
a statement about racism.
I simply don’t believe
that the players believe
in a movement that wants
to undermine capitalism.
I think they are trying to show
respect and to make a stand
against racism and I think booing
that is unpleasant.
And I think also that if a bit
of hectoring by the TV companies
is a pretty small price to pay
for sport at long, long last doing
something about this.
I remember as a kid watching
football with my dad and you would
hear the monkey noises.
And the commentators
would not say a word.
We were sitting there going,
"Are you not going to say
what is going on on the telly?"
They would not say anything.
TV has a pretty sordid past when it
comes to racism in sport.
I think they are probably
overcompensating and over virtue
signalling now but I would far
rather that than where we came
from and it is a step in the right
direction though only a step.
Recognising racism
is the first step.
Dealing with it, dealing
with prejudice of all kinds,
dealing with prejudice
against people of a different
colour, 3 different sexual
orientation, of a different class,
all of that exists in our
society and we need to go
beyond kneeling to acting.
And Robert, just to be clear,
I thought you would be across this
but George Eustice was played
the clip on TV of what happened
at Millwall and he said he could not
hear it terribly well
but he did say that if players
want to take the knee,
that should be are respected.
In terms of the question
from Janine,
have football clubs,
have politicians done enough?
No, and I think Anand’s
point about endemic,
tolerated and accepted racism
in football and in other sport
is sadly well documented
and it is not over yet.
I think if people want to make that
sort of demonstration
and that gesture, then
they should be respected.
But I think Anand is right as well
that it is no good just putting
slogans up and trying to convince
people that somehow
that is going to be enough.
It is up to all of us
in our conduct, what we do, to not
just talk about the characteristics
and the issues but to go beyond that
and look at the people whose lives
are affected by this
because there will be
other circumstances that
will accompany a lot of this,
that creates the barriers
that have to be removed.
And therefore, absolutely,
booing of that is disrespectful,
it is rude and intimidatory
and unacceptable but at the same
time, we all need to be free
to make our own contribution and do
things in our own way
if we are really going to combat
and overcome some of the barriers
and prejudices that
still exist in society.
Mark?
Thank you, Fiona.
Yes, I was obviously
upset about the booing.
What I don’t understand is,
when they are going to start booing,
afterwards, they are going to start
cheering the same players that
scored a goalfor them.
And coming back, I know you don’t
like coming back but I was a bit
discombobulated aboutJulia’s
comment about the small
Caribbean islands.
Ijust wanted to know
what she was on about then.
It was a comment regarding
whether you were America or China
or a small Caribbean island, ie,
a small nation state
without much power.
Phil?
I was just going to add,
I think in terms of player support,
last night or the night before,
there was a game in Europe where two
teams walked off the field
in protest about a racist comment
made by one of the officials,
so I think it does go beyond just
taking the knee now.
Martin?
Yeah, I mean, Istill remember
Martin Luther King and so this topic
started even before then,
as we know, and it
is still raging on.
Ijust don’t know how we get away
from this almost tribal
view of other people,
especially when, the point that
Anand made about he does not
like to be told what to think
and I think a lot of
people feel like that,
whether it is right or wrong.
Steve 7
I am totally against
any form of racism.
I think it is just intolerable.
And it always has been.
But I do feel that taking
the knee might be becoming
past its sell by date,
shall we say, at football
matches, inasmuch as, yes,
everyone is doing it.
Look at F1, look at the grid before
each Grand Prix and they have
the Black Lives Matter moment there.
Half the drivers don’t kneel.
They stand and respect the moment.
I honestly think, if you look
at what is going on within football
and other sports with racism,
I think it has got to the stage now
where the clubs have got
to be more accountable
for their fans’ behaviour.
I know, I have been to football
matches where you hear it
on the tannoy, and it says to you,
"If you hear a racist comment,
please report it to a steward."
You can sit at a London
derby and you can hear
racist protests aplenty.
You tell the steward
and they just walk away.
There has got to be a much harder,
firmer line on it than just,
you know, sort of like taking
the knee or saying that we
won’t tolerate racism.
We have got to actually
physically kick it out.
Julia, let me take you back
to the original question,
talking about the footballers
at Millwall and Colchester
who were booed for taking the knee.
Yeah.
In support of Black Lives Matter.
Was enough done by politicians
and football teams?
What action should they do?
If people are allowed
to make their gesture of taking
the knee, surely the fans
are allowed their gesture back?
I don’t actually approve of either.
Right, so hang on, are you saying
that it was fair enough
that the fans were
booing the players?
It’s a free country.
The fans are allowed to boo.
It is not something
I would have done myself.
That said, I don’t think
that the players should now
or should ever have been
taking the knee.
I think people were desperate
for football and sport generally
to come back after the lockdown
and desperate for some
escapism from the politics,
from the difficulty of daily life,
and they would like to have politics
separate from football
and they did not want it brought in.
Look, I think it is absurd
that we should even need to say,
of course, we don’t want racism,
of course, we abhor racism,
of course we don’t
want it in football...
So when black players feel
it is important to take the knee,
you think they shouldn’t be
taking the knee?
I don’t...
We don’t allow political
demonstrations of any other kind,
other than the wearing of the poppy,
in football matches and we do that
for a very good reason, and this
was a political demonstration.
The players originally,
when they started Premier League
matches, had Black Lives Matter
written on their shirts, the slogan
of a now—political organisation.
Regardless of the Marxist defund
the police aims of the organisation,
I think it is quite bizarre
that the only demonstration that
happens at the beginning
of our football matches should be
a demonstration in relation
to the horrific racist murder
of a black man in America,
many months ago.
It is not something that
happened in this country. anyone
in this country would endorse
or ever say was acceptable.
I find it strange that
that is the one thing.
I am looking forward to those same
footballers showing the same
principles when for instance
many of them will be playing
for England in the Qatar World Cup.
When they go to Qatar,
will they be taking a knee
for all the women who have no real
legal rights and the violence
that goes against them?
Will they take a knee
for all of the gay people
who are imprisoned or even executed
for being gay?
Why are we choosing this one
horrific, terrible act of injustice
and violence as the one issue
that we are expected
to have a political demonstration
of every aingle week?
I think we can all agree
it was a horrific murder,
we don’t want it to happen,
there needs to be more
to tackle police violence,
there needs to be more to tackle
racism in sport and in football
in particular but I don’t feel
the need, and I think a lot of fans
feel the same way,
to have a demonstration
and a gesture about it
every single match.
Wes 7
I will come to you in
a minute, Anand, but Wes.
Sometimes, things happen in history
that are so shocking and so brutal
that it forces a conversation
and opens up an opportunity to shift
the dial in a positive
direction and change deep,
ingrained, endemic problems
which plague societies.
The murder of George Floyd on camera
in front of the eyes of notjust
America but the eyes of the world
opened up such a conversation.
Racism is not new in this country
or the United States of America.
And on a number of levels,
of course, racism in this
country is very different
than it was in the 19805 when I was
born, or the 19505 and 19605.
We don’t have signs up
any longer that say "No
blacks,
no dogs, no Irish.‘
But hate crime remains a problem
and is on the increase
in too many cases.
Indirect discrimination,
whether through education,
employment, criminaljustice,
that remains a problem, too.
When Millwall footballers
decided to take the knee,
nobody thinks that it was some kind
of Marxist protest.
No one thinks that it was about
defunding the police.
What it was about was saying,
"We are not going to be bystanders
to racism and we think this
conversation is important,
and we, footballers,
with fans and a following,
are going to use our platform
to say something about it
and encourage you tojoin in".
Let’s not pretend that the booing
of those players was anything other
than a racist response
to an antiracist protest.
And let’s also...
Can Ijust say, in fairness,
I have to say, whether you agree
with it or not that the Millwall
supporters club has said
that the booing was not
motivated by racism,
they were doing it in reaction
to the taking down of war
memorials and the defacing
of Winston Churchill statues.
Well, let’s not think for a moment
that before everybody booed,
they all looked at each other,
had a little chinwag and decided
what the right response...
You know, let’s have this
kind of conversation
and then we will start booing.
Come on, let’s get real about this.
More positively, at Liverpool,
at Anfield, then at Chelsea,
Stamford Bridge, people
applauded their players
and stood with them,
and in terms ofJulia’s sort
of point, well, what are
people supposed to do
if they see or hear racism?
I know that tackling racism
and challenging it, particularly
when it is from your own side
or within your own tribe
or your own team or your own family,
can be difficult and uncomfortable,
but I bet you it is a hell
of a sight less uncomfortable
than being those players
on the pitch being booed
by their own fans or being the black
fans on the terrace having to listen
to those monkey chants or the banana
skins being thrown at players
and every other manifestation
of racism we see on the pitch,
off the pitch, out in the country
and in our communities.
The problem is notjust racism,
it is bystanders to racism
and I saulte the players
for using their platform
and their opportunity to send
a message to their fans
and supporters and I think most
people in this country
are anti—racists and
would be with them, too.
Malcolm Turnbull?
Thank you, I think Wes
summed it up very well,
you’ve got to have zero
tolerance for racism.
In a multicultural society
above all, as Britain
is and Australia is,
you have got to treat people
with respect, mutual
respect is the glue that
binds our diverse society together.
Taking a knee is a perfectly
respectful statement.
It is a statement about racism.
It is a statement against racism.
Booing people, in any context,
is abuse, let’s be frank, and so,
we have had experience
here in Australia with fans,
some fans, booing aboriginal
players, one in particular,
Adam Goods, who is a real champion
for First Nations peoples here,
and first Australians.
Look, I think you have just got
to have zero tolerance for racism.
I honestly can’t improve
on what Wes said, I think
he summed it up very well.
Anand, we’ve not got much time
but you want to come on that.
I agree with Wes that the killing
of George Floyd was a seismic moment
that led to a debate that was long
overdue that we had.
I mean, I shareJulia’s reservations
to an extent about it
being Black Lives Matter.
I don’t understand,
to be honest, why
it isn’t Kick It Out.
But the fundamental issue for me is,
you have these incredibly powerful
and influential role models,
these footballers, who are revered
on, you know, as role
models, basically saying
at the start of every game,
"Racism is wrong, don’t do it."
And however imperfect it may be,
and whatever sort of connotations
there might be hanging around
the edges, that statement
in and of itself should be welcomed.
The hour is up.
No way!
We are going to end it here.
Some of you still have your hands up
but we’re out of time, I’m afraid.
Tonight, our lovely audience
came from Chelmsford,
thank you forjoining us,
our last audience before
Christmas and I want to say,
don’t forget, wherever you live,
do apply if you would like to join
the QT 50, our new UK wide audience,
and that will start in the New Year.
You can do that by going
to the Question Time website
and following the instructions
and who knows, I might be seeing
you virtually on our big
screen in the New Year.
I would love that to be the case.
Adrian Chiles is coming up
on Question Time Extra Time
with his guests and you can see
on the screen how to get in touch,
by phone, text or tweet and you can
have your say there.
For now, I just want to say,
before Christmas, for us,
thank you very much to the panel
for coming tonight.
Malcolm, thank you for getting
up early in Australia.
I should say that Malcolm earlier
shared his view of the bay
which was pretty gutting
for all of us because it has been
such a grey day in the UK but thank
you very much forjoining us.
And of course, the audience
in Chelmsford, thank
you as well and thank
you to you at home for watching.
Goodbye.
Who’s your 2020 hero?
The incredible people
that made anything possible.
# We created something phenomenal,
don’t you agree? #
This is the power of sport.
They’ve come out
with their heads held high.
Here is an unforgettable moment.
This is the best of everyone.
It’s a year to remember
for so many reasons.
# I know you got my back
and you know I got you
# So come on... #
A star—studded line—up
of contender champions. Take a bow!
And your chance
to vote on the night.
# Let’s get physical! #
BBC Sports Personality of the year.
Who wins it is all up to you.
Who’s ready for some musica?!
MUSIC: Dynamite
by BTS
THEY SCREAM
Aaaargh!
THEY GASP
0h, hey, guys.
THEY SCREAM
What is going on?
Tonight is about family.
There’s no greater gift than love.
I didn’t want you to be lonely.
Films for all the family.
HE LAUGHS
Champion!
Chris, get your phone out and look
at your calendar. 0K, got it. Sunday
at your alandar. 0K, got it. Sunday
the 13th of
at your calendar. 0K, got it. Sunday
the 13th of December, that’s one
they will decide what to do, pull
the plug on the negotiations or
tarry on.
carry on. This Sunday? I think
Parliament’s Christmas holiday is
Partiament’s Christmas holiday is
meant
Parliament’s Christmas holiday is
meant to start on the 17th. They are
but there is an acceptance that
maybe it could be extended a bit if
these Brexit talks rumble on beyond
Sunday and so will the timing knocks
things on. But according to my
calendar, you are going to hit
Christmas pretty quickly. Yes, which
makes me wonder, the week of New
Year’s Eve, which is on a Thursday,
there is going to be a vote in
partiament
parliament on an EU trade deal on
partiament on an EU trade deal on
New
parliament on an EU trade deal on
New Year’s Eve Eve? There are some
working days, technically, not for
Parliament normally but I am just
Partiament normally but I am just
beginning to
Parliament normally but I am just
beginning to think, given that every
iteration of this Brexit process is
usually involved if time is
available, time is used, that maybe,
just maybe, that is what is going to
happen. Are you going to tell
happen. Are you going to tellJools
happen. Are you going to telljools
Holland or shall I?! Sorry, mate, we
are taking over. Here is an early
are taking over. Here is an earty
Christmas
are taking over. Here is an early
Christmas present for you. That is
very grand, you might not like it.
It’s another edition of Newscast,
old style Brexit cast.
Brexitcast. ..
From the BBC.
DANNY DYER: No—one’s got a (BLEEP)
clue what Brexit is!
DONALD TRUMP: Brexit is, errr...
DOMINIC RAAB: I hadn’t quite
understood the full extent of this.
We are particularly reliant
on the Dover—Calais crossing.
KEIR STARMER: This election
blew away the argument
for a second referendum.
BORISJOHNSON: I urge
everyone to find closure.
Let the healing begin.
URSULA VON DER LEYEN: I am sorry.
We will miss you.
YANIS VAROUFAKIS: A process which I
can only describe as a dog’s Brexit.
Hello, it is Adam in the studio. And
[aura in the
Laura in the studio, two metres
[aura in the studio, two metres
apart. Chris in
Laura in the studio, two metres
apart. Chris in the booth. And Katya
in Brussels. And old school reunion.
in Bmssels. And old school reunion.
It is the
in Brussels. And old school reunion.
It is the first time it has been on
BBC One so it is a new
BBC One so it is a newjoke for
BBC One so it is a new joke for
peopla
BBC One so it is a newjoke for
people watching us on television.
peopla watching us on telavision.
That
people watching us on television.
That feel so special, welcome
everyone! It feels... Since there
was the dinner last night in
Brussels between Ursula von der
Bmssels between Ursula von der
Leyen and
Brussels between Ursula von der
Leyen and Boris
Leyen and BorisJohnson, things
Leyen and Borisjohnson, things
seemed pretty tense last night ——
seemed pretty tense last night --
and after
seemed pretty tense last night ——
and after that but they seem more
tense now because Boris
tense now because BorisJohnson just
tense now because Boris johnson just
did a dip
did a clip for
tense now because BorisJohnson just
did a clip for the TV
tense now because BorisJohnsonjust
did a clip for the TV cameras, where
he said he this. We need to be very,
very dear,
very clear, there is a strong
possibility, a strong possibility,
that we will have a solution that is
much more like an Australian
relationship with the EU than a
Canadian relationship with the EU.
That doesn’t mean it is a bad thing.
There are plenty of ways, as I have
There are planty of ways, as I have
said, that
There are plenty of ways, as I have
said, that we can turn that to the
said, that we ran turn that to the
advantage of
said, that we can turn that to the
advantage of both sides in the
conversation. There are plenty of
opportunities for the UK but, yes,
now is time for the public